[MUSIC]
This lecture we'll talk about how
we'll do debugging using the Arduino.
Specifically, how are we
gonna do observability?
How are we gonna get observability?
So observing information about what's
going on when you're running the Arduino,
when you're running the code.
Now, one way is to just look
at the output pins, but
we often wanna see more important, more
detailed information, to put it like that.
And so, we need some way to transfer
information from the Arduino, or
some microcontroller,
to the host that we're debugging from.
And serial interface is
how we're gonna do that.
So, we'll talk about that right now.
So, serial protocols.
So, serial interface basically,
we're talking about a protocol,
a set of protocols really, that speak
between the host and the microcontroller.
And we're going to focus on serial
protocol here, a serial protocol.
Serial protocol in general is
where you transmit data serially.
So you transmit data one bit at a time,
or one chunk at a time.
In our case, one bit at a time.
Instead of, say, eight bits at a time.
The Arduino, the microprocessor in there,
the Mega 328,
it's a eight bit processor, so
each chunk of data is eight bit.
But we're gonna be transmitting
one bit at a time.
So why would we do that?
So the parallel data, eight bits parallel,
are gonna be transmitted
one bit at a time.
The reason why we do this,
is because it saves us pins okay?
So what has to happen is these
parallel bits, these eight bits,
they're sent one at a time.
And at the receiving end they have
to be received one at a time but
grouped back into eight bits, right?
We need the original eight bits back.
So they receive one at a time, and once
you get to eight, it says, okay this is
a group of eight, that's a byte, and
it sends it off and processes it.
So we do this to save pins.
Pin usage is important.
So we mention this when we're
talking about debugging.
There aren't too many pins on these chips.
Relatively, there are very
few pins on these chips.
So, you don't want to have to use eight
pins for debugging if you could help it.
You would rather use one pin.
So that's why serial protocols
are very common for this purpose, for
debugging interfaces,
because they don't use many pins.
Now, they are slower, right?
Because instead of sending all eight
pins in one clock cycle you have to send
one at a time.
So it slows you down but
it saves pins and pins are important.
So pins are precious, that's why we're
using serial protocols in general.
Now there are many different, or rather,
several different serial protocols.
We are gonna focus on UART.
UART stands for Universal
Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter.
It is an old, old protocol.
Still useful though.
It's used for
serial communication between devices.
It gives you long distance actually.
It's asynchronous,
meaning no shared clock.
So what we mean by this is that, so
we talked about what a clock is.
A clock is basically a square wave, okay?
And the square wave has rising edges and
falling edges.
And all the devices in the system time
themselves off of the rising edge, okay.
So, one goal when you're using a clock
is that every item, every say part,
that's receiving the clock, they have to
receive the rising edge at the same time.
So if you look at a circuit board, say you
look at the mother board of a computer,
there is gonna be a system clock.
And the system clock it goes to all
the parts that receive all the chips,
let's say, on the mother board.
And the system clock is gonna
run at a certain frequency.
And the rising edge has to travel
from wherever the clock is generated,
to the chip.
And there is a certain amount of distance.
Maybe it's traveling this far, okay?
But these things are fast.
So this far is a long distance, okay?
So it is important that the rising
edge arrives at every destination at
the same time, or very close to it.
That's the assumption for all of our
systems, that all the parts on your device
that are receiving the clock, they all
receive the rising edge at the same time.
Now that's hard to guarantee in any kind
of a big system because even this much
distance takes a certain
amount of time to travel.
I mean, even for light.
And these signals are travelling
a lot slower than light.
I mean, if you think about how
fast these signals are traveling.
So just give you ball park numbers,
right, take the speed of light, okay?
Now I don't remember the speed of
light off the top of my head, but
I happen to remember that, well I know
that the clock rate of typical processes.
Let's take a processor,
let's say one gigahertz clock rate.
Now that's a slow clock rate for
a modern processor, for a desktop or
something like that.
But, let's say one gigahertz.
So if you have a one gigahertz clock rate,
then you have a one
nanosecond clock period.
That means between two clock edges,
you've got one nanosecond
of time in between there.
So, then how far does the light travel,
even light which is the fastest,
how far this light travel in a nanosecond?
I don't know, about so far, okay?
I don't remember the distance, I'd have to
compute it, but you can check into that.
But it's some short distance, okay.
This isn't a lot of distance.
And a board,
a motherboard can be bigger than this.
So what this is saying is that in a clock,
even the fastest signal can't travel
from one end of the board, right.
And remember that our electrical signals
are traveling a lot slower than light is.
So the reason I bring this is up is
because guaranteeing that every device
in the system receives a rising clock
edge at the same time is extremely hard.
Because they're all different
distances away from wherever the clock
generation is.
So it's very hard.
And that makes UART a nice thing,
because UART is asynchronous
meaning it doesn't have a clock.
It doesn't require a clock so
that's a good feature of UART.
Now as a result of that, UART is slower
than a lot of other protocols and
synchronous protocols might be.
But it has that advantage that it can
work over very long distances because
it doesn't require them
to have the same clock.
Yeah, so
you get the longer communication distance.
Clock skew is not a problem.
So skew is basically, so like I said,
in a synchronous system,
all the clock edges,
all the components receiving the clock,
have to receive the clock
edge at the same instant.
But they never receive it at
exactly the same instant.
There's always a little bit of difference
in the time when they receive it.
And that difference is called clock skew.
And you want to minimize clock skew.
But clock skew isn't such a problem with
UART, because it doesn't have a clock.
So, ways that we use UART.
So, UART used to be much more used.
Not so much anymore.
It's been replaced by other protocols.
But it was used by modems
to connect to networks.
So if you're old enough, you remember
that people would actually take,
when you connect to a network,
AOL or whatever, CompuServe.
You take a phone and actually connect
it to your computer through a modem,
through a big fat modem,
and those thing use UART.
Real slow communication and
very long distance, but it worked.
It was slow, but it worked.
Computers used to have an RS232 port,
standard.
RS232 is a port made to
communicate with UART.
So they used to come standard.
They don't do that anymore because
UART has been sort of supplanted,
taken over by other better,
more effective, protocols nowadays.
So it's not well-used outside
of embedded systems and
IoT devices like we're dealing with.
It's still using those domains for
debugging mostly.
But it's been replaced by things like USB,
ethernet connections, I2C, SPI,
we'll cover those later.
But there are a lot of other options
you can use instead of UART nowadays.
But it's simple, UART is very simple
protocol and it's low hardware overhead.
That's another reason why people still use
it in embedded systems for communication,
for debugging and things like that.
So it's just so convenient to use.
And it's built into most microcontrollers.
So most microcontrollers have
hardware support for UART,
so why not use that for debugging?
Thank you.
[MUSIC]